use-cases.md, before:

# Use-cases
This file lists real-world use-cases that we we want our VMS SXL to support.
For each use-case we list the displays (components) by type.

European requirements for VMS signs is defined with:
- EN 12966:2014+A1:2019 - Road vertical signs - Variable message traffic signs

## Tunnel warning sign
A combined sign with warning lights, a large icon and some text
- 1 icon (warning icon)
- 1 text (warning message, two lines)
- 1 lamp (set of blinking warning lights)

## Parking space sign
Shows free spaces left at a few different parking spots. Text is monochrome
- 3 texts (showing ony integers)

## Speed limit sign

![speed limit](img/speed_limit_sign.png)

Looks essentially a tradional static sign, but is variable. A circle with a number inside, and some text underneath.
- 1 icon (showing 50/60/70)
- 1 text (optional)
- 1 lamp (ring around the sign)

## Warning sign

![warning sign](img/triangular_warning_sign.png)

Triangular warning sign
- Icon
- Optional text

## Text sign

![text sign](img/text_sign.png)

Text information. Can be part of another sign or stand alone.

## Bicycle VMS
One large pixel display, which can shown different things.
- 1 bitmap (messages, icons, etc)

Commit message:

Update use-cases.md with motorway control system

use-cases.md, after:

# Use-cases
This file lists real-world use-cases that we we want our VMS SXL to support.
For each use-case we list the displays (components) by type.

European requirements for VMS signs is defined with:
- EN 12966:2014+A1:2019 - Road vertical signs - Variable message traffic signs

## Tunnel warning sign
A combined  sign with warning lights, a large icon and some text. It's placed outside the tunnel and is used when the tunnel is closed.
- 1 icon (warning icon)
- 1 text (warning message, two lines)
- 1 lamp (set of blinking warning lights)

## Parking space sign
Shows free spaces left at different parking spots. Text is monochrome, but can sometimes change color depending on whether there are free spots, or not:
- 3 texts (showing only integers)

## Motorway control system
Typically above the lanes of the motorway.
For each lane a few things can be shown:
- speed limit (number inside a ring)
- lane closure (cross)
- directions to switch lane (arrow)

Some of these icons include yellow flashers in the corners. Either as part of the display or as separate lamps.
The flasher are control by logic in the VMS, e.g. if the speed limit is reduced, then the flashers are activated.
This would normally be enforced by the VMS, but it should be possible to override this. It should also be possible to read the status of the flashers and the displays.

If the logic and enforcement of rules is done in the central system, it's very important that you can change every display simultanously, and that nothing is changed if some display would not be able to shown what you request, since that might result in an invalid status of displays.

This type of use-case could be handled by having an icon display and a lamp (set of flashers) per lane.

## Speed limit sign
![speed limit](img/speed_limit_sign.png)

Looks essentially like a tradional static sign, but is variable. A circle with a number inside, and some text underneath.
- 1 icon (showing 50/60/70)
- 1 text (optional)
- 1 lamp (ring around the sign)

## Warning sign
![warning sign](img/triangular_warning_sign.png)

Triangular warning sign
- Icon
- Optional text

## Text sign
![text sign](img/text_sign.png)

Text information. Can be part of another sign or stand alone.

## Bicycle VMS
One large pixel display, which can shown different things.
- 1 bitmap (messages, icons, etc)
